---
layout: default
title: Is AI coming for your bioinformatics job?
---

# *Is AI coming for your bioinformatics job?*

  Amid the hype surrounding recent advances in AI, programmers in every domain have begun wringing their hands about being replaced. Even in my own field, bioinformatics, the question seems pervasive. Of course, as bioinformaticians, our role as a scientific advisor is far too complex to be filled by modern AI, at least by any of the currently commercially available models. To be a scientist is to operate on the edge of what is known and unknown, and the unknown is a concept that modern AI are famously bad at comprehending. 

  By modern AI, I mean LLMs (Large Language Models) like ChatGPT, which to its credit can synthesize large amounts of information, though with varying degrees of accuracy. Certainly it can even complete a basic task that a bioinformatician could be asked to do, like produce a simple pipeline to process RNASeq reads. I encourage you to ask it to try. But, before you fire your lab tech, you should know, this process has been a standardized practice for a while and it’s pretty easy to google; this is the kind of problem whose solution draws mostly on what is already known, and consequently it is a problem an LLM is quite good at solving. 

  While AI has not surpassed a human’s ability in intellect yet, I’d wager it has surpassed our ability to store and summarize information efficiently. ChatGPT can render the basic pipeline to process RNASeq reads on screen faster than I could even begin to try. But far from creating a simple pipeline here or there, LLMs have more to offer the bioinformatician through their ability to summarize more information than any single human could possibly hold in their head. 

  In this vein, researchers are already pushing the boundaries of what we expect from LLMs in bioinformatics. In a recent [Nature communication](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-024-02235-4#Sec2) Wenpin Hou and Zicheng Ji develop a GPT that can outperform state of the art cell-type annotation software on scRNASeq atlases. The process of cell-type annotation requires cross referencing the transcriptomic profiles of many previously characterized cells, usually performed by an expert who knows gene markers for many specific cell types. Even then, the experts that are available for consulting often have ‘spiky’ knowledge – a deep understanding of a few specialized topics – which means this task can also involve an arduous literature search for anything that falls outside the consultant’s familiar domain. You can see, then, how an LLM may soon be better suited for this task due to its ability to retain and summarize *more information*, though obviously in a less nuanced way than its fleshy counterpart. 

  This research is a promising use-case of exactly the *kind* of problem that LLMs are best at, querying large pools of data with natural language. But will you really be able to replace your lab’s bioinformatician with a GPT? A better question is, is it the bioinformatician in this scenario that would be replaced? Or for that matter, any extant expert at all? No, I think it is far more likely that bioinformaticians will learn to implement advances in AI to call upon the vast trove of existing human-generated data. AI isn’t going to replace scientists or experts any time soon, but it may prove useful to those who choose to adopt the technology wisely. 
